RHDEVDOCS-5210: Documenting Pipelines 1.11 RN (#59661)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/op-release-notes-1-11.adoc

[id="resolver-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Resolvers

* With this update, the `ClusterResolver` feature is now available by default. You can use this feature to fetch tasks and pipelines from a configured namespace. 
* With this update, the `BundleResolver` feature is now available by default. You can use this feature to fetch tasks and pipelines from a Tekton bundle. 
+
[NOTE]
====
The `BundleResolver` feature must be preferred over the `taskref.bundle` or `pipelineref.bundle` syntax.
====

[id="chains-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-chains}

[id="tekton-hub-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-hub}

:FeatureName: {tekton-hub}
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

* This update adds a new endpoint `resource/<catalog_name>/<kind>/<resource_name>/raw` and a new field named `resourceURLPath` in the `resource` API response. This update helps you to obtain the latest raw YAML file of the resource.

[id="tekton-results-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Tekton Results

:FeatureName: Tekton Results
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

> * This update adds Tekton Results to the Tekton Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This update adds Tekton Results to the Tekton Operator as an optional component.
```

// Module included in the following assembly:
//
// * cicd/pipelines/op-release-notes.adoc
:_content-type: REFERENCE
[id="op-release-notes-1-11_{context}"]
= Release notes for {pipelines-title} General Availability 1.11

With this update, {pipelines-title} General Availability (GA) 1.11 is available on {product-title} 4.12 and later versions.

[id="new-features-1-11_{context}"]
== New features

In addition to fixes and stability improvements, the following sections highlight what is new in {pipelines-title} 1.11.

[id="pipelines-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Pipelines

* With this update, you can use {pipelines-title} on the {product-title} cluster that runs on ARM hardware. This update includes support for the `ClusterTask` resources where images are available and the Tekton CLI tool on ARM hardware.

* This update adds support for results, object parameters, array results, and indexing into an array when you set the `enable-api-fields` feature flag to `beta` in the `TektonConfig` CR.

> * With this update, propagated parameters are now part of a stable feature. This feature enables interpolating parameters in embedded specifications to reduce verbosity in Tekton resources. 

Author: We are referring to Tekton resources in general. No need of back ticks.

** Replace an array with an array parameter or a string with a string, array, or object parameter in the `matrix.params` configuration.
** Replace a string with a string, array, or object parameter in the `matrix.include` configuration.
** Replace the context of a pipeline task with another context in the `matrix.include` configuration.

* With this update, the `TaskRun` validation process also validates the `matrix.include` parameters. The validation checks whether all parameters have values and match the specified type, and object parameters have all the keys required.

* This update adds a new field named `default-resolver-type` in the `default-configs` config map. You can set the value of this field to configure a default resolver.

* With this update, you can define and use a `PipelineRun` context variable in the `pipelineRun.workspaces.subPath` configuration.

* With this update, the `ClusterResolver`, `BundleResolver`, `HubResolver`, and `GitResolver` features are now available by default. 
+
[NOTE]
====
The `taskref.bundle` and `pipelineref.bundle` bundles are deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

> ====

Reviewer 2: Should this not be moved to the Deprecated Features section? Why is it appearing here?

Author: Thank you for pointing this. Moved to the deprecated section.

* With this update, if there are any changes in the {product-title} cluster-wide proxy, Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) recreates the {pipelines-title} Operator. 
* With this update, you can disable the pruner feature by setting the `config.pruner.disabled` field to `true` in the `TektonConfig` CR.

[id="chains-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-chains}

* With this update, {tekton-chains} is now generally available for use.

* With this update, you can use the skopeo tool with {tekton-chains} to generate keys, which are used in the `cosign` signing scheme. 

[id="tekton-hub-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-hub}

:FeatureName: {tekton-hub}
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

* This update adds a new endpoint `resource/<catalog_name>/<kind>/<resource_name>/raw` and a new field named `resourceURLPath` in the `resource` API response. This update helps you to obtain the latest raw YAML file of the resource.

[id="tekton-results-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Tekton Results

:FeatureName: Tekton Results
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

* This update adds Tekton Results to the Tekton Operator as an optional component.

> * When you filter your pipeline results based on the query `order_by=created_time+desc&page_size=1`, you get zero records without any `nextPageToken` in the output. 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this go into "Known issues" section?

Author: Yes, moved the point to the known issues section. Thank you

[id="pac-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {pac}

> * With this update, {pac} allows you to expand a custom parameter within your `PipelineRun` resource by using the `params` field. You can specify a value for the custom parameter inside the template of the `Repository` CR. The specified value replaces the custom parameter in your pipeline run. Also, you can define a custom parameter and use its expansion only when specified conditions were matched for a CEL filter.

Author: compatible does not seem the correct word here because we use compatibility in terms of software, hardware, or any other platform, not with CEL filter.

> * With this update, {pac} allows you to expand a custom parameter within your `PipelineRun` resource by using the `params` field. You can specify a value for the custom parameter inside the template of the `Repository` CR. The specified value replaces the custom parameter in your pipeline run. Also, you can define a custom parameter and use its expansion only when specified conditions were matched for a CEL filter.

Author: done

* With this update, you can either rerun a specific pipeline or all pipelines by clicking the *Re-run all checks* button in the *Checks* tab of the GitHub interface.

* This update adds a new command named `tkn pac info` to the {pac} CLI. As an administrator, you can use the `tkn pac info` command to obtain the following details about the {pac} installation:
** The location where {pac} is installed.
** The version number of {pac}.
** An overview of the `Repository` CR created on the cluster and the URL associated with the repository.
** Details of any installed GitHub applications.
+
With this command, you can also specify a custom GitHub API URL by using the `--github-api-url` argument.

> * With this update, error detection is enabled for all `PipelineRuns` by default. {pac} detects if a `PipelineRun` execution has failed and shows a snippet of the last few lines of the error. For a GitHub application, {pac} detects error messages in the container logs and exposes them as annotations on a pull request. 

Author: This should be `PipelineRun`. Thank you.

* With this update, you can define the provenance source from where the `PipelineRun` definition will be fetched. By default, {pac} fetches the `PipelineRun` definition from the branch where the event has been triggered. Now, you can configure the value of the `pipelinerun_provenance` setting to `default_branch` so that the `PipelineRun` definition will be fetched from the default branch of the repository as configured on GitHub.

* With this update, you can extend the scope of the GitHub token at the following two levels:
** Repository-level: Use this level to extend the scope to the repositories that exist in the same namespace in which the original repository exists.
** Global-level: Use this level to extend the scope to the repositories that exist in a different namespace.

* With this update, {pac} triggers a CI pipeline for a pull request created by a user who is not an owner, collaborator, or public member or is not listed in the `owner` file but has permissions to push changes to the repository.

> * With this update, the custom console setting allows you to use custom parameters from a `Repository` CR. 

Author: This modification does not look technically correct. The setting is already enabled and has added one more functionality to use. Leaving the sentence as is.

* With this update, {pac} changes all `PipelineRun` labels to `PipelineRun` annotations. You can use a `PipelineRun` annotation to mark a Tekton resource, instead of using a `PipelineRun` label.

[id="breaking-changes-1-11_{context}"]	
== Breaking changes	

* This update replaces the `resource-verification-mode` feature flag with a new flag named `trusted-resources-verification-no-match-policy` in the pipeline specification.

[id="deprecated-features-1-11_{context}"]	
== Deprecated and removed features	

* This update removes support for the `PipelineResource` commands and references from Tekton CLI:
** Removal of `PipelineResources` from cluster tasks
** Removal of `PipelineResources` from tasks

> ** Removal of `PipelineResources` from pipelines

Reviewer 2: mention the object type after the backticks?

Author: They are resources only, if i write `PipelineResources` resources, then it would sound odd.
I am making it generic.

** Removal of resource commands
** Removal of input and output resources from the `clustertask describe` command 

* This update removes support for the `full` embedded status from Tekton CLI.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `PipelineResource` CR has been removed, use the `Task` CR instead.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `v1alpha1.Run` objects has been removed. You must upgrade the objects from `v1alpha1.Run` to `v1beta1.CustomRun` before upgrading to this release. 

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `custom-task-version` feature flag has been removed.

> * In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `pipelinerun.status.taskRuns` and `pipelinerun.status.runs` fields have been removed along with the `embedded-status` feature flag. As an alternative, you can use the `pipelinerun.status.childReferences` field instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `pipelinerun.status.taskRuns` and `pipelinerun.status.runs` fields have been removed along with the `embedded-status` feature flag. Use the `pipelinerun.status.childReferences` field instead.
```

[id="known-issues-1-11_{context}"]	
== Known issues	

> * Setting the `prune-per-resource` boolean field does not delete `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resources, if they were not part of any pipeline or task. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Setting the `prune-per-resource` boolean field does not delete `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resources if they were not part of any pipeline or task. 
```

* Tekton CLI does not show logs of the `PipelineRun` resources that are created by using resolvers.

> * When you filter your pipeline results based on the query `order_by=created_time+desc&page_size=1`, you get zero records without any `nextPageToken` in the output. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When you filter your pipeline results based on the `order_by=created_time+desc&page_size=1` query, you get zero records without any `nextPageToken` in the output. 
```
`nextPageToken` value? what object is this?

[id="fixed-issues-1-11_{context}"]	
== Fixed issues	

> * Before this update, {pac} failed to create a `PipelineRun` resource when it would detect the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR. With this update, {pac} supports providing the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, {pac} failed to create a `PipelineRun` resource when it could detect the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR. With this update, {pac} supports providing the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR.
```
Please check with the SME for technical accuracy.

Author: could points to the ability of PAC for detecting something, which is not the case here. 
I would leave the sentence as is.

* This update fixes the `tkn pr delete` command for the `keep` flag. Now, if the value of the `keep` flag is equal to the number of the associated task runs or pipeline runs, then the command returns the exit code `0` along with a message.

* Before this update, the Tekton Operator did not expose the performance configuration fields for any customizations. With this update, as a cluster administrator, you can customize the following performance configuration fields in the `TektonConfig` CR based on your needs:
** `disable-ha`
** `buckets`
** `kube-api-qps`
** `kube-api-burst`
** `threads-per-controller` 

* This update fixes the remote bundle resolver to perform a case-insensitive comparison of the `kind` field with the `dev.tekton.image.kind` annotation value in the bundle. 

* Before this update, pods for remote resolvers were terminated because of insufficient memory when you would clone a large Git repository. This update fixes the issue and increases the memory limit for deploying remote resolvers. 

* With this update, task and pipeline resources of `v1` type are supported in remote resolution.

> * This update reverts the removal of embedded `TaskRun` status from the API.  The embedded `TaskRun` status is now available as a deprecated feature to support compatibility with older versions of the client server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This update reverts the removal of embedded `TaskRun` status from the API. The embedded `TaskRun` status is now available as a deprecated feature to support compatibility with older versions of the client-server.
```

> * Before this update, all annotations were merged into `PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` resources even if they might not be required for the execution. With this update, when you merge annotations into `PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` resources, the `last-applied-configuration` annotation is skipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, all annotations were merged into `PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` resources even if they were not required for the execution. With this update, when you merge annotations into `PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` resources, the `last-applied-configuration` annotation is skipped.
```

> * This update fixes a regression issue to not validate a skipped task result in pipeline results. For example, if a `PipelineTask` resource referenced by the pipeline result was skipped, the pipeline result will not be emitted and the `PipelineRun` execution will not fail due to a missing result.

Reviewer 2: Too much passive voice. Very confusing. Needs rewrite for complicity and clarity.

> * This update fixes a regression issue to not validate a skipped task result in pipeline results. For example, if a `PipelineTask` resource referenced by the pipeline result was skipped, the pipeline result will not be emitted and the `PipelineRun` execution will not fail due to a missing result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This update fixes a regression issue and prevents the validation of a skipped task result in pipeline results. For example, if a skipped pipeline result references a`PipelineTask` resource and the pipeline result is not emitted, now the `PipelineRun` execution does not fail due to a missing result.
```
Please check with the SME for technical accuracy.

Author: Modified the second stmt for clarity. Thank you for the suggestion.

* This update uses the pod status message to determine the cause of a pod termination.

* Before this update, the default resolver was not set for the execution of the `finally` tasks. This update sets the default resolver for the `finally` tasks.

* With this update, {pipelines-title} avoids occasional failures of the `TaskRun` or `PipelineRun` execution when you use remote resolution.

> * Before this update, a long pipeline run would stuck in the running state on the cluster, even after the timeout. This update fixes the issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, a long pipeline run would be stuck in the running state on the cluster, even after the timeout. This update fixes the issue.
```

> * This update fixes the `tkn pr delete` command for using the `keep` flag correctly. Now, if the value of the `keep` flag is equal to number of associated task runs or pipeline runs, the `tkn pr delete` command returns exit code `0` along with a message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This update fixes the `tkn pr delete` command for correctly using the `keep` flag. Now, if the value of the `keep` flag equals the number of associated task runs or pipeline runs, the `tkn pr delete` command returns exit code `0` along with a message.
```

* With this update, you can extend the scope of the GitHub token at the following two levels:
** Repository-level: Use this level to extend the scope to the repositories that exist in the same namespace in which the original repository exists.
** Global-level: Use this level to extend the scope to the repositories that exist in a different namespace.

* With this update, {pac} triggers a CI pipeline for a pull request created by a user who is not an owner, collaborator, or public member or is not listed in the `owner` file but has permissions to push changes to the repository.

* With this update, the custom console setting allows you to use custom parameters from a `Repository` CR. 

* With this update, {pac} changes all `PipelineRun` labels to `PipelineRun` annotations. You can use a `PipelineRun` annotation to mark a Tekton resource, instead of using a `PipelineRun` label.

> * With this update, {pac} provides an option to install a webhook forwarder named `gosmee`. This forwarder enables connectivity between the {pac} controller and GitHub without requiring an internet connection. You need to explicitly specify the `--force-gosmee` flag when bootstrapping on the {product-title} cluster.

Reviewer 4: we can remove this, feature is not working and there is something else we need to talk about it to make it customer facing

* With this update, if there are any changes in the {product-title} cluster-wide proxy, Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) recreates the {pipelines-title} Operator. 
* With this update, you can disable the pruner feature by setting the value of the `config.pruner.disabled` field to `true` in the `TektonConfig` CR.

[id="chains-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-chains}

* With this update, {tekton-chains} is now generally available for use.

* With this update, you can use the skopeo tool with {tekton-chains} to generate keys, which are used in the `cosign` signing scheme. 

[id="tekton-hub-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== {tekton-hub}

:FeatureName: {tekton-hub}
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

* This update adds a new `resource/<catalog_name>/<kind>/<resource_name>/raw` endpoint and a new `resourceURLPath` field in the `resource` API response. This update helps you to obtain the latest raw YAML file of the resource.

[id="tekton-results-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Tekton Results

:FeatureName: Tekton Results
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

* This update adds Tekton Results to the Tekton Operator as an optional component.

> 

Reviewer: Can you add installation instructions:

To install Tekton Results, please use following commands:
```
export NAMESPACE="openshift-pipelines"
# Create DB user and password
oc create secret generic tekton-results-postgres --namespace=${NAMESPACE} --from-literal=POSTGRES_USER=result --from-literal=POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$(openssl rand -base64 20)

# Generate new self-signed cert or ca provided
openssl req -x509 \
-newkey rsa:4096 \
-keyout key.pem \
-out cert.pem \
-days 365 \
-nodes \
-subj "/CN=tekton-results-api-service.${NAMESPACE}.svc.cluster.local" \
-addext "subjectAltName = DNS:tekton-results-api-service.${NAMESPACE}.svc.cluster.local"

# Create new TLS Secret from cert.
oc create secret tls -n ${NAMESPACE} tekton-results-tls \
--cert=cert.pem \

# Create PVC for logging if PVC storage for logging is required
cat <<EOF > pvc.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: tekton-logs
  namespace: tekton-pipelines
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
EOF
// Apply the above PVC
oc apply -f pvc.yaml
```
Now apply the TektonResult CR needed:
```
apiVersion: operator.tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: TektonResult
metadata:
  name: result
spec:
  targetNamespace: openshift-pipelines
  logs_api: true
  log_level: debug
  db_port: 5432
  db_user: result
  db_host: tekton-results-postgres-service.openshift-pipelines.svc.cluster.local
  logging_pvc_name: tekton-logs
  logs_path: /logs
  logs_type: File
  logs_buffer_size: 32768
  auth_disable: true
  tls_hostname_override: tekton-results-api-service.openshift-pipelines.svc.cluster.local
  db_enable_auto_migration: true
  server_port: 8080
  prometheus_port: 9090
  ```

* This update adds a new endpoint `resource/<catalog_name>/<kind>/<resource_name>/raw` and a new field named `resourceURLPath` in the `resource` API response. This update helps you to obtain the latest raw YAML file of the resource.

[id="tekton-results-new-features-1-11_{context}"]

> === Tekton Results

Reviewer: Can we write Tech Preview here? Tekton Results (Tech Preview)

Author: I have already added a TP note, you can view it in the preview: https://59661--docspreview.netlify.app/openshift-enterprise/latest/cicd/pipelines/op-release-notes.html#new-features-1-11_op-release-notes

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `PipelineResource` CR has been removed, use the `Task` CR instead.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `v1alpha1.Run` objects has been removed. You must upgrade the objects from `v1alpha1.Run` to `v1beta1.CustomRun` before upgrading to this release. 

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `custom-task-version` feature flag has been removed.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `pipelinerun.status.taskRuns` and `pipelinerun.status.runs` fields have been removed along with the `embedded-status` feature flag. Use the `pipelinerun.status.childReferences` field instead.

[id="known-issues-1-11_{context}"]	
== Known issues	

* Setting the `prune-per-resource` boolean field does not delete `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resources if they were not part of any pipeline or task. 

* Tekton CLI does not show logs of the `PipelineRun` resources that are created by using resolvers.

* When you filter your pipeline results based on the `order_by=created_time+desc&page_size=1` query, you get zero records without any `nextPageToken` value in the output. 

> * When you set the `loglevel.pipelinesascode` field to `debug`, no logs with level debug are generated in the {pac} controller pod. As a workaround, restart the {pac} controller pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Currently, when you set the value of the `loglevel.pipelinesascode` field to `debug`, no ldebugging logs are generated in the {pac} controller pod. As a workaround, restart the {pac} controller pod.
```

> * {pipelines-title} fails to run the `RELEASE-TEST-CLUSTERTASK` resources on the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)-enabled cluster.

Reviewer 3: This needs to be reworded. Name of test suite is irrelevant.

[id="fixed-issues-1-11_{context}"]	
== Fixed issues	

> * Before this update, {pac} failed to create a `PipelineRun` resource when it would detect the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR. With this update, {pac} supports providing the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, {pac} failed to create a `PipelineRun` resource while detecting the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR. With this update, {pac} supports providing the `generateName` field in the `PipelineRun` CR.
```

* This update adds a Slack interceptor that allows you to extract fields by using a slash command in Slack. The extracted fields are sent in the form data section of an HTTP request.

[id="operator-new-features-1-11_{context}"]
=== Operator

* With this update, you can configure pruning for each pipeline run or task run resource by setting a boolean field named `prune-per-resource` in the `TektonConfig` CR. You can also configure pruning for each pipeline run or task run resource in a  namespace by adding the annotation, `operator.tekton.dev/prune.prune-per-resource=true`, to that namespace.
* With this update, if there are any changes in the {product-title} cluster-wide proxy, Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) recreates the {pipelines-title} Operator. 
* With this update, you can disable the pruner feature by setting the `config.pruner.disabled` field to `true` in the `TektonConfig` CR.
* This update increments the version number of pipelines to 0.47.
* This update increments the version number of {pac} to 0.19.

[id="resolver-new-features-1-11_{context}"]

> === Resolvers

Reviewer 5: All resolvers were added at the same time, so they were disable by default before, and now enabled by default (with `v1beta1`).

> === Resolvers

Reviewer 3: So should we add also HubResolver and GitResolver to this/Pipelines section?

> === Resolvers

Author: As per Vincent's explaination, if all the resolvers were disabled before and are now enable by default, then we need to mention the other 2 resolvers (HubResolver and GitResolver) as well. I am updating the information and would ask @vdemeester to confirm.

> === Resolvers

Author: With this update, the `ClusterResolver`, `BundleResolver`, `HubResolver` and `GitResolver` features are now available by default.

> === Resolvers

Reviewer 5: yes 👍🏼

== Deprecated and removed features	

* This update removes support for the `PipelineResource` commands and references from Tekton CLI:
** Removal of `PipelineResources` from cluster tasks
** Removal of `PipelineResources` from tasks
** Removal of `PipelineResources` from pipelines
** Removal of resource commands
** Removal of input and output resources from the `clustertask describe` command 

* This update removes support for the `full` embedded status from Tekton CLI.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `PipelineResource` CR has been removed, use the `Task` CR instead.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, support for the `v1alpha1.Run` objects has been removed. You must upgrade the objects from `v1alpha1.Run` to `v1beta1.CustomRun` before upgrading to this release. 

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `custom-task-version` feature flag has been removed.

* In {pipelines-title} 1.11, the `pipelinerun.status.taskRuns` and `pipelinerun.status.runs` fields have been removed along with the `embedded-status` feature flag. As an alternative, you can use the `pipelinerun.status.childReferences` field instead.

[id="known-issues-1-11_{context}"]	
== Known issues	

> * Setting the `prune-per-resource` boolean field does not delete `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resources, if they are not defined in a pipeline or task. 

Reviewer 3: I'm confused about what this means...pipeline/task don't define pipelinerun/taskrun :confused:

Author: Modified for clarity: Setting the `prune-per-resource` boolean field does not delete `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resources, if they did not belong to any pipeline or task.
